# CRDTs

## Highlevels
- Let's start with the CAP theorem: C in CAP is different from ACID
- Consistency models:
  - Strong doesn't allow conflict to happen
  - Eventual resolves conflict by arbitration and rolling back (consensus moved to background). A
    key issue is that at any given moment we don't know what's true.
    - Q: note that this is different from some durability requirement: eventual reliable deliable
      delivery
  - Strong eventual consistency: water-mark.
    - Eventual delivery could be solved by quorum, but the quorums don't need to syncronize (e.g.
      with Paxos). This also relates to failure models (tolerate zero-faults)
    - "Solves" the CAP problem (not theorem but practical problem)?
      - Just plug in eventual consistency!...

## How CRDTs Work
- Types:
  - State (physical in Aries): send state to synchronize
    - Note: one of the merge requirement, idempotency is cheap (with IDs & bloom filters)
  - Operation (logical in Aries): send operations to synchronize
    - delivery order is needed for liveness?
      - Q: why do we need it if ops are communitive?
        A: if it's communitive thedn we don't need delivery order
      - Q: does this mean not everything is concurrent?
      - Q: is it partial order? Timestamps for sharing states, but global timestamp is
           multi-paxos, but we might get away with logical clocks
  - They are actually equivalant (there is a proof) --- could be emulated.
  Q: more details on the Aries reference?
- Set designs?
  - LWW is a local timestamp
- Linearizability
  - It's dataflow (not concurrency), e.g. z=x+y

## Example:
*observed-remove set*
  - What actually happens?? Does it return a?
    - we see a
    - they do have some "causality"
  - What if the tombstone arrives earlier? This actually relates to delivery order
  - What if alpha is added on thread B after remove on thread A?

Real life: operational transforms (google docs)

## Usability?
Q: relationship to Bloom^L
A: Bloom^L is more general and covers composition. CRDT is more data structure side, and Bloom^L is
more programming lanauge side. Thinking about it bottome up.

C: not trivial to design the right data structures, this paper has done the work
Joe: still need to think about composition! (Bloom^L)


# Freeze After Writing
Evolution: IVar -> LVar -> LVarish

## LVars:
- Threshold value:
  - program passes the value in (cannot use compare equals)
  - must be parirwise incompatible (see slides) to avoid race conditions
    - it's sort of like least upper bound (?)
  - detect races -- only allow one to happen, and we have a winner determinism
    - could be detected statically (not the races but that they will be detected).
- Has a lot of restrictions! no negatives! (exactly CALM), we want quasi-determinism

# LV-ish
- Event handlers
  - similar to adding rules in logical programming
- quiesce
  - there are no event handlers running
  - handlers are organized by groups and that's how quiesce identify them
  - race with quiesce is fine since it doesn't do anything but "seal"
- freezing
  - returns the current value of LVar
  - updating will err
  - determinism is good for stocks and easy to reason about
- freeze-after-with
  - quasi-determinism
  - this is like reading quantum bit : )
- runParThenFreeze
  - forces all puts
  - In distributed sytem language: quiesce does not consider "membership" but runParThenFreeze could
    - similar to sealing in CALM
  - Q: how is this different from using a semaphore
    A: we want the type system to guarantee this

## Performance & Tricks
- Atomistic Lattices
  - good for sets
  - good for performance (deltas)
- Race with put --- eagerly put
  - but could freeze after an operation, so use per-CPU bit when putting
  - ???

## Vision
- data structure vs application developer
  - Q: is this divide real? composition still need to be done by application
- compile time check?
- Comment: crashing is reasonable, better than obscure errors

