# Tardis: Time Traveling Coherence Algorithm for Distributed Shared Memory
## Xiangyao Yu, Srinivas Devadas
## MIT

### Erik Krogen
I know nothing about hardware, so this paper was somewhat foreign to me in parts. I find their idea of physiological time very useful and reminiscent of many other things we have discussed, though with a more tight linking to physical time--which seems to make sense to me, since these clocks are closer to the physical world than some of the other clocks we've discussed in the course. The notion of "traveling forward" in time seems reminiscent of some other things we've discussed as well, where it's fine to write wherever you like as long as there hasn't already been a read after that. 

Some questions I am left with: Knowing nothing about hardware, will this be difficult to implement? It doesn't seem any more difficult than the directory coherence, but there may be things I am missing. How accurate are simulations -> will this actually perform well in practice? Since you take a lease on cachelines, and have to write into the future, doesn't this mean that other cores may get stale data (w.r.t. to phyical time)

### Chenggang Wu

This paper presents Tardis, a new memory coherence protocol that uses timestamp counters to order memory operations and enforce sequential consistency in shared memory system. The motivation is that today’s widely-adopted directory based coherence protocols have latency and scalability issues. Specifically, the delay incurred by waiting for the acknowledgement message of invalidation requests raises performance concerns, and storing the sharer information or supporting broadcast won’t scale. Tardis can directly express the memory consistency model by enforcing the global memory order with timestamp counters without using a globally synchronized clock. Furthermore, it only requires O(logN) instead of O(N) storage per cache block where N denotes the number of cores. The authors argue that Tardis is simpler to understand, implement, and has better scalability over directory based coherence protocols.

The comparison between Lamport clocks and their physiological (a combination of physical time and logical timestamp order) clock is interesting. Basically, the main difference is that if the order is implicit in physical time, the physiological timestamp is not incremented. Another thing to note is that although Tardis offers better performance and scalability during the invalidation and eviction phase, it might incur more overhead during data renewal due to the possibility of expired cacheline. Therefore the effectiveness of this protocol might be workload dependent.

### Xinghao Pan

Tardis is a timestamp-based cache coherence protocol.
Its key idea is to separate physical time from logical time, thus breaking the tighter synchronization between cores in a directory-based cache coherence protocol.
This is achieved by moving writes / stores forward in (logical) time so that writes are always after any committed reads / loads.

The Tardis approach to cache coherence reminds me of MVCC -- in order for writes to never invalidate reads, we simply ensure writes are logically after any committed reads.
The comparison with directory-based coherence also looks similar to the comparison of MVCC (or timestamp-based) with lock-based concurrency control mechanisms.
In locking / directory approaches, logical time and physical time are conflated.
MVCC and Tardis allows the two to be separate.
With this in mind, I'm not sure that I buy the Tardis argument that timestamped cache coherence is always more scalable and easier to reason about.
For example, in read-heavy workloads, Tardis has to perform extra work compared to directory-coherence.
Personally, I also found the directory-based protocol much easier to think about than tracking all the various timestamps in Tardis.

The distinction with Lamport clocks seems like a false dichotomy, since concatenating logical and physical time gives us a global ordering, a la Lamport clocks.
The real difference, to me, is that Lamport clocks are always advanced, whereas Tardis's physiological clocks are only advanced to prevent write-after-write and read-after-write dependencies.
In particular, read-after-read do not advance the logical clock.
